-   Document number: P1025R0
-   Date: 2018-04-23
-   Author: Steve Downey <sdowney2@bloomberg.net>
-   Audience: Core


# Abstract

The reference to the Unicode Standard in the C++ Standard should be updated to the stable base standard or any successor standard.


# References

P0417R1 : C++17 should refer to ISO/IEC 10646 2014 instead of 1994


# Preferred New Reference

> ISO/IEC 10646:2017 Information technology &#x2013; Universal Coded Character Set (UCS) plus 10646:2017/DAmd 1, or successor

The 'or successor' wording is borrowed from the current ECMAScript standard, ECMAScript® 2017 Language Specification (ECMA-262, 8th edition, June 2017), available at <https://www.ecma-international.org/ecma-262/8.0/index.html#sec-normative-references> . The 'or successor' language has been in place since at least the 2015 standard.

The Unicode Consortium has made a number of stability guarantees based on the referenced standard, promising that any currently conforming Unicode text will continue to be interpreted the same way in the future for purposes of encoding, collation, registration, and locales.

<https://www.unicode.org/policies/policies.html>

This means that it is safe to allow implementations to adopt newer Unicode standards without affecting the interpretation of existing conforming text. Since in practice, due to customer demand, everyone ships the latest Unicode data and algorithms available, this allows conformance to existing practice, particularly as new, advanced, unicode libraries are incorporated into the standard.


# Immediate Effects

The Unicode standard that the C++ Standard refers to predates UTF-16 and UTF-32, instead defining UCS2 and UCS4. Moving to a newer standard would make the former terms well defined in the C++ Standard. It has been argued that the ECMAScript standard referred to uses a newer Unicode standard, in which those terms are defined, so those terms are defined for the C++ Standard by transitive reference. If that argument is accepted, then moving to the newer version makes the intent explicit.

In addition, in 1996, as part of amendments 5, 6 and 7, the original set of Hangul characters were removed and added at a new location, as well as Tibetan characters added again. This places the current citation in the standard of "ISO/IEC 10646-1:1993" in conflict with the version imported by way of the ECMAScript standard. In practice, all implementors adopt the later version for conversion operations.

See <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unicode#Versions> for a summary of the changes over the years.


# UCS2 and UCS4 in codecvt facets

The last proposal to update the Unicode Standard reference, P0417R1, was entangled with deprecation of UCS2 and UCS4. The remaining references are in the now deprecated codecvt facets [depr.locale.stdcvt.req]. There is resistance to changing those to UTF-16 and UTF-32, since, particularly for UCS2, there are real changes in behavior. UTF-32 can be viewed as UCS4. UTF-16 can not. Since there may be users of the facility depending on the behavior as it was when standardized this paper does not propose changing them, but instead leaving them in place, as deprecated features, with no formal definition, as there is none to refer to anymore.


# Fall-back Change

The current Unicode standard, 10.0, is equivalent to

> 10646:2017, fifth edition, plus the following additions from Amendment 1 to the fifth edition:
>
> 56 emoji characters
>
> 285 hentaigana
>
> 3 additional Zanabazar Square characters

copied from <https://www.unicode.org/versions/Unicode10.0.0/>

The 2017 standard is ISO/IEC 10646:2017 so as a fall-back position, the standard should be updated to

> ISO/IEC 10646:2017 Information technology &#x2013; Universal Coded Character Set (UCS) plus 10646:2017/DAmd 1

Without the 'or successor' language.
