# Named character escapes

Document Number: D1097R0  
Date: 2018-06-09  
Audience: Evolution Working Group, Core Working Group  
Reply-to: cpp@rmf.io

## Motivation

Currently C++ provides four ways to specify characters in string literals:

 1. the character itself in the appropriate source encoding;
 2. the character as a sequence of `\x` escapes that corresponds to the underlying code units of the character;
 3. the character as a `\u` escape that corresponds to the ISO 10646 short identifier of the character;
 4. the character as a `\U` escape that corresponds to the ISO 10646 short identifier of the character;

These last two are the best way to represent specific Unicode characters that may be hard to type, hard to read, or that
cannot be represented in the source encoding. For example, if one wants a string literal with a combining acute accent,
typing `"\u0301"` is easier than producing a combining acute without a base character, and it is guaranteed that it
won't render wonky in a text editor (e.g. the acute could be rendered on top of the opening double quotes, making it
ugly, and above all, easy to miss).

However, `"\u0301"` is hard to read as well: yes, it's unambiguously clear that this is the character U+0301, but in
general there is no way to know what character that is without first looking it up on some table. This solves the
problem of clarity that is inherent with typing the character directly, but in turn it obfuscates the actual character
behind a series of meaningless numbers.

Other programming languages, in particular Python3 and Perl, have solved this obfuscation problem by providing an
alternative character escape mechanism. In these languages, one can specify a character by using its Unicode Name, as
in the following Python3 example:

    >>> print('A\N{COMBINING ACUTE ACCENT}')
    Á

Having this ability enables one to choose between the brevity of "0301" and the clarity of "combining acute accent" as
desired.

This paper proposes the addition of character escape sequences similar to these to C++ string literals.

## Names

Each Unicode character has a Name property associated. They correspond to the names in the English edition of
ISO/IEC 10646. These names are meant to be used as unique identifiers for each character. Once assigned they never
change. Such names contain only characters from a limited set: the capital letters A-Z, the digits 0-9, spaces, and
hyphens; all of them are in the C++ basic character set. Supporting these names is the bare minimum necessary for this
feature.

However, for added convenience, some leeway in the matching of these names is preferable. The names use only capital
letters, but it would be convenient to ignore case so that the following all result in the same string:

    "\N{LATIN CAPITAL LETTER A}" // exact match
    "\N{Latin capital letter A}"
    "\N{latin capital letter a}"

Another convenient feature would be to allow hyphens and spaces to be treated the same, so as to make the following
result in the same string:

    "\N{ZERO WIDTH SPACE}" // exact match
    "\N{ZERO-WIDTH SPACE}" // common spelling, e.g. Wikipedia
    "\N{zero-width space}"

The Unicode Standard describes which transformations are guaranteed to still produce unique identifiers and recommends
the loose matching rule [UAX44-LM2]: "Ignore case, whitespace, underscore ('_'), and all medial hyphens except the
hyphen in U+1180 HANGUL JUNGSEONG O-E". This is the most liberal set of transformations that can be forwards-compatible.
Stricter sets of transformations are also possible. Python 3 allows lowercasing the names, but no other differences;
Perl 6 allows only exact matching names. This paper proposes the same matching as Python 3.

[UAX44-LM2]: https://www.unicode.org/reports/tr44/#UAX44-LM2

## Name Aliases

In addition to the Name property, Unicode characters can also have several values of the Name_Alias property assigned to
them. The values of this property are effectively additional names for a character. Aliases can be corrections, names
for characters that have no Name property, alternative names, or common abbreviations.

Assignment of these aliases follows the same rules of assignment of Names: they draw from the same character set, once
assigned the values are immutable, and they share the same namespace. Thanks to this last property, it is possible to
allow named character escape sequences to match via both the Name and Name_Alias property.

    "\N{NO-BREAK SPACE}"      // matches Name for U+00A0
    "\N{KANNADA LETTER LLLA}" // matches correction alias for U+0CDE
    "\N{NBSP}"                // matches abbreviation alias for for U+00A0
    "\N{LINE FEED}"           // matches control character alias for U+000A
    "\N{LF}"                  // matches abbreviation alias for U+000A

Both Python 3 and Perl support name aliases in their named character escapes.

These aliases are defined normatively by the Unicode Standard, but not all of them are normative in ISO/IEC 10646. This means that, without a normative reference to the Unicode Standard, only the first two can be specified to work. This paper proposes adding support
for all of the alias types.

## Named Character Sequences

In addition to names and aliases, there is a third set of identifiers that shares the same namespace and the same rules
of assignment: named character sequences. These names represent sequences of Unicode characters for which there is a
need for an identifier; they are used e.g. to correlate with identifiers in other standards. Again, because these share
the same namespace, it is possible to add these as a third option for matching named character escape sequences without
conflict.

    "\N{LATIN SMALL LETTER I WITH MACRON AND GRAVE}"  // matches the named sequence <U+012B, U+0300>
    "\N{KEYCAP DIGIT ZERO}"                           // matches the named sequence <U+0030, U+FE0F, U+20E3>"

Python 3 does not support named character sequences, but Perl does. This paper does not propose adding support for named character
sequences.

## Bikeshedding

The syntax used in the description above uses `\N{NAME}` as the escape sequence for this feature, for familiarity
reasons, as the author has used that syntax in Python 3. Perl 5 uses the same syntax as Python 3; Perl 6 uses
`\c[NAME]`, instead. Either of these two syntaxes would generate no conflicts with present day C++ syntax. Other
alternatives are also possible, as long as we paint the shed red.

## Technical Specifications

Add the following item after 2 [intro.refs], item (1.2):

> <sup>(1.3)</sup>  — The Unicode Consortium. The Unicode Standard. http://www.unicode.org/versions/latest/

Edit 5.13.3 [lex.ccon] as follows:

> *escape-sequence*:  
>     *simple-escape-sequence*  
>     *octal-escape-sequence*  
>     *hexadecimal-escape-sequence*  
>     <ins>*named-escape-sequence*</ins>
>
> <ins>*named-escape-sequence*:  
>     `\` `N` `{` *n-char-sequence* `}`</ins>
>
> <ins>*n-char-sequence*:  
>     *n-char*  
>     *n-char-sequence* *n-char*</ins>
>
> <ins>*n-char*: one of  
>     `A` `B` `C` `D` `E` `F` `G` `H` `I` `J` `K` `L` `M` `N` `O` `P` `Q` `R` `S` `T` `U` `V` `W` `X` `Y` `Z`  
>     `a` `b` `c` `d` `e` `f` `g` `h` `i` `j` `k` `l` `m` `n` `o` `p` `q` `r` `s` `t` `u` `v` `w` `x` `y` `z`  
>     `0` `1` `2` `3` `4` `5` `6` `7` `8` `9`  
>     `-`, or space</ins>

Add the following paragraph after 5.13.3 [lex.ccon], paragraph 9:

> <sup>10</sup> <ins>A *named-escape-sequence* designates the character whose Unicode Name or Name_Alias property value
> is equal to the *n-char-sequence* after replacing all instances of the lowercase letters with their corresponding
> uppercase letters. If there is no such character, the program is ill-formed.</ins>

Edit 5.13.5 [lex.string], paragraph 15 as follows:

> <sup>15</sup> Escape sequences and *universal-character-names* in non-raw string literals have the same meaning as in character
> literals, except that the single quote `'` is representable either by itself or by the escape sequence `\'`, and the
> double quote `"` shall be preceded by a `\`, and except that a *universal-character-name* <ins>or
> *named-escape-sequence*</ins> in a `char16_t` string literal may yield a surrogate pair. In a narrow string literal, a
> *universal-character-name* <ins>or *named-escape-sequence*</ins> may map to more than one char element due to
> multibyte encoding.  The size of a `char32_t` or wide string literal is the total number of escape sequences,
> *universal-character-names*<ins>, *named-escape-sequences*</ins>, and other characters, plus one for the terminating
> `U'\0'` or `L'\0'`. The size of a `char16_t` string literal is the total number of escape sequences,
> *universal-character-names*<ins>, *named-escape-sequences*</ins>, and other characters, plus one for each character
> requiring a surrogate pair, plus one for the terminating `u'\0'`. [ *Note:* The size of a `char16_t` string literal is
> the number of code units, not the number of characters. — *end note*] Within `char32_t` and `char16_t` string
> literals, any universal-character-names shall be within the range `0x0` to `0x10FFFF`. The size of a narrow string
> literal is the total number of escape sequences and other characters, plus at least one for the multibyte encoding of
> each *universal-character-name*<ins> or *named-escape-sequence*</ins>, plus one for the terminating `'\0'`.  

Edit 5.2 [lex.phases], paragraph 1, step 5 as follows:

> 5. Each source character set member in a character literal or a string literal as well as each escape sequence<del>
> and</del><ins>,</ins> *universal-character-name*<ins>, and *named-escape-sequence*</ins> in a character literal or a
> non-raw string literal, is converted to the corresponding member of the execution character set ([lex.ccon],
> [lex.string]); if there is no corresponding member, it is converted to an implementation-defined member other than the
> null (wide) character.
